# JOURN124-Final-Project
Creating a journalism story with data for the final project. This one covers Airline Passenger traffic by global region since 2010.
# The Middle East Has Outpaced Everyone In Air Travel for Two Decades and Counting
## Summary
2020 saw air travel come to a near-halt. Within months, every global region lost roughly three-quarters of all commercial air traffic. Five years removed from the pandemic's onset, the universal collapse of the airline industry has produced fundamentally different patterns of recovery and growth compared to the 2010s. This data analysis of fifteen years of commerical air travel passenger metrics reveals that the Middle Eastern commercial aviation market has not only recovered, but grown larger than pre-COVID numbers.

The race for second place proves equally interesting. For almost the entirety of the 2010s, Asia firmly proved to hold the race's silver medal. But since 2019 specifically, Africa has overtaken it. Growth, therefore, continues to be a metric defined by who's still climbing as opposed to who started the race as the biggest or fastest growing region. 
## Data Acquisition
The dataset used originates from a larger aggregation of data published on Kaggle by researcher Sergey Nefedov titled *Global Aviation Industry 2010-2026*, under a CC0 Public Domain License, a link to which can be found [here](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sergionefedov/global-aviation-industry-2010-2026/data). 

The dataset used is labeled passenger_traffic.csv; figures provided come from the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Air Passenger Market Analysis Reports and International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) traffic statistics. While it can be presumed that this data is entirely accurate as it arrives from governing bodies, it is important to note that the dataset constructed by Nefedov is not a direct copy of the raw statistics, but includes statistical interpolations of data collected annually on a month-to-month basis. This is furthered discussed in the limitations section below.
## Data Analysis
### Link to Google Sheet
Data analysis was conducted on Google Sheets. A link to the Google Sheet used in this project can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1heeWxLyFZ2BzfppqhhXGnJnIucrFeVfttklozONUzyA/edit?usp=sharing). Additionally, a .xlsx file is also available in the repository and can be downloaded by clicking [here](SAJ124FINAL.xlsx).
### Building Out the Sheet
The original .csv file, which is available to be viewed as a protected sheet, only featured a clunky date column titled *year_month* which could not be charted as a timelime. Rather than editing original data, I first duplicated the sheet and addadded two columns: a text column labeled **MONTH - YEAR Text** with `=TEXT(DATE(B2,C2,1),"mmmm yyyy")` and a more primitive number-forward date value with `=DATE(B2,C2,1)`. These were then extended to all rows of the data set. These were mainly used for readability during the initial perusing of the data set and later proved to be rather irrelevant for constructing pivot tables and graphs.
### Sheet Overview
The raw data contains one row per region, per month. This totals 1,176 rows; 196 rows for each of the six regions. The three columns exist contaning numerical data: RPK (Revenue Passenger Kilometers), ASK (Available Seat Kilometers), which are measured in the billions and Load Factor. Without getting too granular, RPK can be seen as a measure of *demand* and ASK a measure fo *supply*. Load Factor is a percentage; it's RPK divided by ASK: the proportion of available seats filled with paying passengers.
### Selecting RPK as the System of Measurement
RPK, passenger demand, was chosen as the metric over ASK, supply of seats, because it best tells the story of **how many people are flying** as opposed to how many airline seats are available originating from a specific geographic region. It best showcases the movement of people, as opposed to whether airlines in a specific region have additional capacity.
### Working on the Data
A pivot table was built, with *region* in rows, *year* in columns, and the *SUM of RPK* in values, aggregating all twelve months' worth of data per year into annual figures per region.

However, tracking growth is not something that is possible via a pivot table. For that, another sheet was built. Titled *Pivot Percentage Calculations* this pulls values from the pivot table with the `VLOOKUP` function. `=VLOOKUP($A2, Pivot!$A$2:$S$8,2,FALSE)` Calculating growth from 2010 to 2025 was then just `=(D2-B2)/B2` to calculate RPK growth from 2010 - 2025 and `=(D2-C2)/C2` extended across rows respectively. Bar charts visualizing this data are posted below.
### Creating a Line Plot Visualization
To create a detailed line plot to track RPK growth percentage via Datawrapper.de, I needed the RPK percentage growth of all sixteen years (2010 - 2025). Another sheet was made for this, which is labeled as *Pivot Table Percentage Calculations* in the .xlsx file. While there is data for the year 2026, it is incomplete, so when totaled RPK growth as a proportion or a percentages shows negative growth as adding four months as a yearly total creates something misleadingly small. After much trial, error, and table-banging in frustration the formula `=VLOOKUP(B$1, Pivot!$A$2:$S$8, $A2-2008, FALSE) / VLOOKUP(B$1, Pivot!$A$2:$S$8, 2, FALSE) -1` served as an intuitive way to pool the data into proper table which could be copied into Datawrapper.

To clarify 2008, in the formula is not an arbitrary number. It is used to pull accurately from the specific column in the pivot table. "Year - 2008" lines 
